---
# t1.md
title: The Programming Language MANOOL
---

{%include page_header.md%}{%raw%}


First and foremost, I believe programming languages should never be regarded as good or bad in an absolute sense. After all, even COBOL (a language commonly
ignored and even despised by us, language designers, computer scientists, and practicing software engineers) has its ideal market niche and things that it does
right for that niche out-of-the-box. Rather, each language is just a result of many conflicting design goals and many design tradeoffs; any improvement a
language is expected to make to programming practice has to be evaluated only for specific (and often narrow) range of practical situations.

The purpose of this language overview is to present and discuss such result for the case of MANOOL (i.e., MANOOL-1, AKA _the original_ version). Here I do not
mention deliberately many design goals and decisions or rationale of MANOOL, to make the article more concise. Instead, I provide a lot of examples giving a
taste of the language and thus making this overview immediately appealing to language geeks and curious software engineers.

In any case, you should be informed about one irrefutable drawback of MANOOL at this moment: lack of user community and culture around it (and lack of advocacy
whatsoever). Originally, I started to work on my language to explore a specific design space in programming languages and overcome some limitations of existing
languages in situations I used to deal with in the past. (I do plan, nonetheless, to use it for my other programming tasks and would be comfortable with it. I
am also going to complete the design and implementation of a minimally different language, MANOOL-2, with slightly different tradeoffs where the ultimate goal
is run-time performance.)

---

MANOOL is a general-purpose *high-level* language with largely orthogonal features and few special cases, though a substantial attention to run-time
*performance* is paid (and especially to asymptotic complexity of basic operations, which is covered by the language specification); it is specifically designed
as both an exploratory-programming and production-level language. For instance, it has by default value semantics, which is actually Copy-On-Write semantics (so
there is no need for tracing garbage collector, and resource management is more deterministic). Thus, after `A[0] = 1; B = A; A[0] = 2`, `B[0]` equals to `1`,
but the complexity of `A[0] = 1` and `B = A` is normally constant. (Similarly, after `A[0] = 1; B = A; B[0] = 2`, `A[0]` equals to `1`.)

From the standpoint of data manipulation philosophy in MANOOL, the programmer can focus either on _values_ or _objects_ that represent them whenever greater
control over run-time performance is needed. To speed up things, there is an explicit _move_ operator to break unwanted object sharing (inspired from "move" in
C++ but a bit more straightforward), which assigns to an assignable location the value `Nil` and evaluates to its previous value. Thus, the concatenation `S =
S! + "Hello"` has amortized constant complexity (same for `A[0] = A[0]! + "Hello"`), whereas `S = S + "Hello"` has indeed linear run-time complexity.

There is syntactic sugar: `A[0] = 1` is equivalent to `A = Repl[A!; 0; 1]`, so in-place updates can have value semantics (and amortized constant complexity)
even for user-defined datatypes (just provide the `Repl` operation). On even more rare occasions, the user may need to clone objects explicitly (because
incrementing/decrementing a refcounter for shared objects may be expensive, especially in a multithreaded setting); so he could write `V.Clone[]` (or
`Clone[V]`). To obtain reference semantics (should your programming style require it, on rare occasions), MANOOL provides explicitly a pointer type: after `A =
MakePtr[1]; B = A; A^ = 2`, `B^` equals to `2`.

---

MANOOL is a general-purpose *dynamic* language; that is, it relies on run-time type checking and supports unrestricted compile-time evaluation (including
syntactic macro-expansion) and other dynamic features (including first-class _polymorphic operations_, AKA abstract methods according to OOP terminology), which
in fact makes the language more simple and uniform from its definition standpoint. From this point of view, MANOOL could be seen as an alternative to other
dynamic languages, such as Python, Ruby, JavaScript, Lua, PHP, or Scheme.

On the other hand, syntax-wise, MANOOL is definitely on the side of Lisp-family languages (Common Lisp, Scheme, Clojure, and others), although it may be a bit
unobvious, since it uses an alternative surface syntax that can be seen as a more sugared variant of the syntax of S-expressions (like Dylan but more
streamlined). In any case, MANOOL also has some more unusual aspects described below.

It takes a more extreme approach than even Lisp(s): Every construct in MANOOL, such as conditionals or even name bindings (except one construct: `extern`) is in
fact imported from a library, and thus alternative languages can be provided as long as the surface syntax and the core semantic aspects admit it. This is
rather the result of the implementation strategy, which vastly streamlines and modularizes the MANOOL translator. The most clear precedents of this approach are
Tcl and Forth.

It has by default value semantics (which is actually Copy-On-Write semantics, so there's no need for a tracing garbage collector, and resource management is
more deterministic). That is, after `A[0] = 1; B = A; A[0] = 2`, `B[0]` equals to `1` (but the complexity of `A[0] = 1` and `B = A` is normally constant).

Let's first consider the second aspect. From MANOOL's philosophy standpoint, the user can either focus on values or objects that represent them if he needs to
have greater control over run-time performance, including asymptotic complexity. To speed up things, there's an explicit move operator to break unwanted object
sharing (inspired from C++'s move but a bit more straightforward), which assigns to an assignable location the value Nil and evaluates to its previous value.
That is, S = S! + "Hello" has constant complexity (same for A[0] = A[0]! + "Hello"), whereas S = S + "Hello" has linear complexity of course. There is syntactic
sugar: A[0] = 1 is equivalent to A = Repl[A!; 0; 1], so in-place updates can have value semantics (and amortized constant complexity) even for user-defined
datatypes (just provide the Repl operation). On even more rare occasions, the user may need to clone objects explicitly (because incrementing/decrementing a
refcounter for shared objects may be expensive, especially in a multithreaded setting); so he could write V.Clone[] (or Clone[V]). To obtain reference semantics
(should your programming style require it, on rare occasions), MANOOL provides explicitly a pointer type: after A = MakePtr[1]; B = A; A^ = 2, B^ equals to 2.

Note that this value semantics makes the language more on the functional side-effect-free side without disallowing traditional assignment altogether (would not
work well otherwise because of the move operation) and that whether two objects that represent the same value are shared (i.e., are the same object) is
irrelevant to the program semantics (only for performance). There's no official way to test for object sameness unless they have reference semantics like
pointers or are essentially mutable objects like I/O streams or unless when defining your own datatype (an abstract datatype). Also note that immutability that
arises from COW speeds up multithreaded programs (MANOOL's implementation is fully multithreaded) and simplifies aliasing analysis in real optimizing compilers.
At this moment I am implementing such optimizing compiler trying to: propagate constants and types (MANOOL as such has run-time type checking, to simplify the
language), eliminate redundant refcount increments/decrements, unbox values, and eliminate redundant malloc/free.

The syntax of MANOOL is based on a homoiconic representation but is different from S-expressions. Many do not like it. There's no much space in MANOOL to
provide "beautiful", tailored constructs for composite data constructors, but in return it is very uniform and very extensible. For example, to construct an
array you could write {array of 1 2 3}, to construct a set: {set of 1 2 3} (in MANOOL-2 they will be: {array I64}[1 2 3] and {set I64}[1 2 3], or even (array
I64)[1 2 3] or (set I64)[1 2 3]). Unfortunately, syntax is a highly debated topic, as well as compile-time vs run-time type checking.

More examples of syntax: {let rec Fact = {proc {N} as: if N == 0 then 1 else N * Fact[N - 1]} in ...}. In MANOOL-2 it might have a more Haskell/ML-like
appearance: let rec Fact = (proc N as: if N == 0 then 1 else N * Fact[N - 1]) in .... The later is less uniform (including due to my default indenting
principles, which I do not reproduce here), but it might be less surprising and make happy more people :-) Note that in any case all equivalent forms of coding
in MANOOL are covered by just less than 40 productions of the context-free grammar (which is of LL(2) class after usual left recursion elimination).


{%endraw%}{%include page_footer.md%}
